name Mark. Just at the top I'm just going to say I'm Marcia Armani the
interviewer with Gareth Davis with an I or an E? Of course.
Is that the Welsh version? Well absolutely. And we're at Caleon and it is
Monday April 29 2019 and we're here to interview Dr. Mark Lewis. Mark so I'm
just going to pop that there. I wonder if you could just introduce yourself. Who
you are, what you do. Okay I'm Dr. Mark Lewis. I'm the senior curator of Roman
archaeology at the National Museum of Wales based at the National Roman
Legion Museum in Caleon. We hold all the Roman material from the two legionary
bases in Wales that happen to be very close together at Usk nearby and Caleon
where this museum is based. So we only hold Roman objects in our collections
and anything that's later any medieval material is sent off to the National
Museum in Cardiff because we are part of the National Museum of Wales but we hold
all the Roman material from those two legionary bases. There is a third Welsh
legionary base but it was built on the wrong side of the River Dee on the wrong
bank by the Romans so it's Chester and had it been on the other bank it would
be in Wales but it is our counterpart in the north if you like it's a very
similar geographical location at the lowest crossing point of the Dee and
took its name after the river Diva, Dewa, after the Dee and Isca, Caleon
Isca was named after the Usk. So we do have these mirror image fortresses at
either end of Wales but sadly as far as the National Museum is concerned the
great collections and great fortress of Chester just happened to be on
the wrong bank so they're in England in the modern boundary is along the river.
So your interest in Roman, where does that come from?
Well I grew up on the edge of the levels in Caldecott and of course Caldecott is
adjacent to the great Roman city of Carwent, our tribal capital and I had a
fabulous inspirational history teacher when I went to Caldecott comprehensive
school who you will have met Peter Strong. He was my history teacher at the
age of 11 and on Sunday mornings he used to take the school minibus to an
excavation at Trostry near Usk and we used to dig and we were taught to dig
there from the age of 11, a group of us. Many of my contemporaries fell away as
time went by and as winters approached because we dug all the way through the
year at Trostry but he kept going, I kept going for three years and that took me
up to my teenage years when I was old enough to join the Roman excavations at
Carwent that were being undertaken by the National Museum of Wales and
directed by Richard Brewer the then keeper of Roman archaeology. So at the
age of 15 I joined the excavations in Carwent and because they happened during
the summer during school holidays I was able to continue to excavate there
through my GCSEs, through my A levels and even into when I was studying for my
degree for nine seasons in all. So that's where I got my love for Roman
archaeology and where I really sharpened my digging skills to become a
competent field archaeologist. What an inspirational teacher. Absolutely and I
think individuals, individual characters are absolutely critical. Somebody will
somewhere in their lives meet someone that that gives them that spark of
inspiration or then mentors them to develop it and Peter, I was very lucky I
had a number, there was also a local gentleman that used to come to that dig
from Rogget again on the edge of the levels called Barry Stopgate and he was
a very much a historian and archaeologist but interested in vernacular
architecture so farmhouses, old farmhouses and old farm buildings. So very
soon having Doug alongside Barry for years and years and years I was holding
the other end of his measuring tapes as we surveyed all the ancient farmhouses
the Tudor and Jacobean farmhouses on the levels and on the south of the county.
The farmhouses in the north of the county had been surveyed by Lord Raglan
and Sir Cyril Fox of the National Museum in the early part of the 19th century
but they'd never come down to the south of Monmouthshire so we started picking
off a number of the houses. I joined Barry who'd been studying these houses
for some time so private individuals would give us access to their own
homes and we'd measure them, survey them accurately, look at the internal features
like ancient fireplaces, staircases, plaster ceilings in some cases, paneled
Tudor paneled passageways etc and we would photograph them, measure them and
then write them up and many of those reports are deposited in the local
library service. So these characters are inspirational and one thing leads
to another and without them and the inspiration from my own father used to
take me to all these places and give me access and do much especially on the
landscape side of things in understanding how things fit together in a landscape
context. Well when I went to university one of the things we were taught very
early on was a new sort of theory in archaeology that was called a
phenomenology of landscape and it was the way that people move about in
landscapes and then start to attach meaning or importance to certain
features within landscapes. Perhaps they mark passageways between the summer
grazing or the winter grazing, perhaps they mark out territory where people lay
claim to grazing rights through the positions of their chambered tombs, the
early farmers, the first monuments within our landscape that we can still see
today. So people started to place monuments, their burial mounds with
respect to certain views from them so that they could look down on their
former territory and life from the grave etc. So there's a relationship
between the archaeology, the monuments and where they're positioned within the
landscape perhaps with respect to ancient communication routes, the road
system etc. And my father had always intuitively been very very knowledgeable
and thoroughly understood that aspect of landscape and so when I went to
university and they taught this as really quite modern theory that had only
been published about the time I was at university I was immediately overjoyed
that I thoroughly understood this because this is the way I'd been trained
but I was immediately depressed that I hadn't published it first because I fully
understood this new theory because this is the way I viewed archaeology and had
been raised to view it. And so it's a number of factors that have brought
me along the path that I now tread but those early mentors and that
early inspiration was key to really getting me going on the journey.
Feel free to ask questions Gareth.
Thank you, yes I will. It's just interesting that you've drawn the archaeology and
geomorphology really together. How do you see that fitting in possibly when we look
at the landscape on the levels?
I think, and for me it's the way I think that we can best understand the interaction
between man and our landscape or that particular landscape in the past but the
importance that I place on the levels is not wholly historical. It's the fact that
it can inform our futures globally actually not just locally. I think if we
take the lessons and our understandings of the pasts on the levels at different
points in time and we project them forward in the knowledge that the
current predictions are for continued global sea level rise, temperature rise
and the commensurate sea level rise that will come with that on a global
basis then we can look at the way the levels have been affected by sea level
rise, the coming and going of the high mean water spring tide over time and
project what that will mean for people on the levels and elsewhere in the
future because people in the past have had the ability to move in and out of
this landscape. In the Iron Age and before the Neolithic farmers, the Iron
Age farmers even as far back as the Mesolithic, the Middle Stone Age, people
moved in and out of the tidal zone if you like and the flood plains of
the levels. It would be very much a summer grazing area for pastoral farming.
Very little if any arable, no evidence really for arable, very very localized
probably places like the higher ground like Goldcliff Island and otherwise on
the Fen Edge and this is shown again in a landscape sense by the positions of
the early Norman churches. If you look at the earliest churches in southern
Monmouthshire they sit along the Fen Edge right on the edge where the level meets
the rising ground up off the flood plain so you start off with places like
St. Pierre, Mathen, you move along then Port Scuett right on the edge where
the ground starts to rise up off the flood plain. Caldecott again securely
just up off the water meadows where the castle sits and then you travel along
to the two rogues again on the very edge. Undie again right on the edge so
close to the railway line which again was then placed right at the edge on the
slightly higher rising ground and of course the M4 is even further inland
but again hugs that higher ground. So people move from the winter grazing on
the higher land, the less boggy areas down to this very very fertile rich flood
plain the levels for summer grazing. So you've got this transhumance as
it's called the movement of livestock and people in and out of the landscape.
If it floods you move out, if it is dry then you can utilize it
for grazing. Well the issues we have with the intensification of land use and with
population rises that people don't really want to move in and out of areas
anymore and they economically they're not able to do so. We're quite sedentary,
we're quite fixed within landscapes and the problem that we have is that the
landscape of the levels is pretty much fossilized at its ancient levels, Roman
ground level covered by about half a meter of later clay inundation from
inundations later on and very little since the land is at a certain level but
the sea has continued to rise very slowly since the end of the last ice
age and the current concerns with regard to global warming are that it
seems to be rising more quickly now since the industrial age, the dawn of
the industrial age then if the land stays at the same level but sea level
and high tides are rising higher and higher you become more and more reliant
upon sea defenses until you can't rely on them anymore because eventually it
might catch up with them. If you have a failure of a low sea defense it's not
that catastrophic usually the water will flood in it will flow back out again
but if you build astronomically high sea defenses and there's a there's a failure
of the sea defense then it can be quite catastrophic because then you start to
get more tsunami like waves that sweep across the landscape so the idea of just
raising sea walls ever higher is probably not the way to approach any
future sea level rise so I think if we take lessons from the past and look at
when the levels were first defended when they were first first attempts at
drainage were made on a large scale to improve the land and then to defend it
from the sea we can start to look at what the futures may be for different
areas of the levels if the current trend for sea level rise continues.
Do you remember the very first piece of what first seen you uncovered as a youngster in an archaeological table?
Well trust you we were very lucky it was a medieval manor house and we were
just we were in the ditch around it so that's where they just threw all
their refuse all their rubbish so huge amounts of wonderful pottery quite late
actually 17th century we do haven't got down to the medieval layers and so
beautiful glazes beautiful roulette patterns on these pots so it was quite
beautiful material that helps it wasn't just boring old grey broken potsherds so
yeah I think my first ever finds were were actually were the 17th 18th century
pottery in abundance at Trostrie.
But what did that feel like and were you aware then of the age?
Yeah it felt like an immediate sort of one step removed contact with the past
because the hand that dropped it in there it hadn't moved until the hand
removed it so you do feel that you're the first person to have handled
something since it was last handled then you wonder how it was deposited who
went through the process of depositing it and what their thoughts may have been
probably thoughtlessly just just getting rid of as much rubbish as they can into
the ditch they had their own cares and worries and then probably diseases so it
opens up a whole world of possibilities as to what the back story for that tiny
little pot should might have been how was it broken in the first place and
where on earth is the rest of it because it's so common that you'll find one
piece of a pot if I break something in the kitchen I sweep it all up and I
deposit it together but somehow over time things often don't find their way
into the ground as parts of the whole deposited together often you just find
one part and just make you wonder what happened to the rest of it hasn't turned
to dust so it's all out there somewhere it's just there waiting to be found
I often think when I pass an old stone wall that's hidden in off the track that
who who made that wall where what were their lives like it's lovely to hear you
describe that what about your first piece of Roman wear that will certainly
have been at car went I was quite early on my first couple of years there we
had wonderful concrete floors within the Basilica the town hall car went to the
the the the the Civic Center if you like for this this tribal area and these
wonderful concrete floors needed cleaning so I've sat about traveling
down onto these wonderful floors now they didn't need these particular
floors I was on were offices they didn't have mosaics on the floor they didn't
have these beautiful quarter round corner moldings rather like a skirting
board around the edge I remember that very distinctly I remember finding my
first my first coins there at car went but my most important discovery there
was not actually an object at all it was a hole in the ground a circular hole in
the ground in the middle of the Basilica so between the two colonnades of what
would have looked like a modern Cathedral really with two aisles and a
knave down the middle it would have stood at least 15 meters high very very
tall building a huge I'll haul and in the middle in the foundation levels the
the the natural soil was a hole with an X shaped slot that settled or being cut
down into the clay and I just dug what was there and that's what it produced a
hole like a with an X a big X in the ground I didn't know what it was but the
director knew immediately what it was because one had been found at London and
it was the impression in the soil that had been left by the crane that the
Romans had used to raise the column drums on top to build the colonnade so
because he knew now where the crane sat in the middle to do the two columns on
either side he knew where the columns were as they'd gone and because he knew
the spacing from the end wall of where that those columns were because of the
position of the crane he could tell where the columns were how many they were
how equally spaced they were and because of the way Roman
architecture works he could then calculate the height of the building so
it became apparent to me very early on it's not a treasure hunt for the staff
it's about the information that we can gain through this process so my best
discovery in many ways or certainly one of the best was was not an object at all
it was just a shape in the soil in the ground a slightly different colored soil
with a slightly different texture that we were able to follow the shape of and
it gave us the indentation in the ground where a Roman crane has been
set up maybe only for a day or two but it that that impression was sealed
beneath the floors of the Basilica and has survived for 1850 years to be
rediscovered so again is that there's that connection with an event that was
never monumentalized it was never set up like some grand monument to be admired
by future generations it's just a passing moment in time that just happened
to get fossilized in the soil imprint and gave us information that we could
release from the ground over nearly 2,000 years later
you've also got a passion for the Roman period that's obvious but where do you
see and how do you see the Roman footprint in the levels particularly?
well I like to look either side and to contextualize it because it was Sir
Augustine that said that the world is like a book and those that don't travel
only read one page now that's true if you don't travel geographically but
it's true if you don't travel in time so if I only studied the Roman period I
probably wouldn't understand it at all because they stand on the shoulders of
every previous generation and then there are memories of how things were in the
Roman period that shape all future generations including today because
we're still using their alphabet and Latin is hugely important in Welsh and
English so on the levels we've got evidence that Roman sea level was much
lower than it is today nearly 1.8 meters lower on any one given tide will
be like for like about one and three quarter meters lower that's because as
we've come out of the last ice age sea level has slowed down it's rising over
time but it's still rising ever so slightly and there are other sorts of
geological impacts in Britain such as isostatic rebound and the fact that the
east of Britain is slightly tipping in the West rising up ever so slightly but
nonetheless in the Severnestuary and here at Cullien we're about 1.7 meters
higher at any high tide today than it will have been in the past so if you
take off that 1.7 meters across the levels actually most tides would never
have flooded and you would need a sea wall on the levels so we start to
question how old the sea defenses are likely to be and to have been but what
we can find when we dig down on the levels is that all Roman land surfaces
are covered by later inundations which left around half a meter or so to a
meter of the gray heavy alluvium the gray clay from the estuary that you can
see beneath the sea wall anywhere where there's no seagrass growing and once
you get below that half a meter or so you get to the old Roman land surfaces
but you don't get that many field systems there are localized field
systems around Nash water treatment works at Goldcliff and they tend to have
been formed where the Romans cut ditches and when you cut a ditch you get
a bank that goes with it and they form little enclosures or fields but the
banks aren't serious attempts at sea walls they might protect from the odd
couple of feet inundation but then they're not they're not a continuous sea
wall as we would understand it so the focus for them was probably to just
improve the grazing by draining or speeding drainage into the adjacent
ditches and to take the water away and they appear to have been involved in
some serious engineering works because one of the most important Roman finds
from the grant levels was found off Goldcliff Point at Goldcliff Pill on the
edge of the pill and it's a lius limestone flat slab about two to three
feet in height and it's inscribed in Latin probably in the second or third
centuries AD and it says the century of Statorius Maximus of the first cohort so
from this legion at Caillean the second Augustine legion the soldiers of the
century under the century in Statorius Maximus constructed thirty three and a
half paces of something that's all it says the interesting thing about the
stone is it's a very thin slab and the bottom half has not been inscribed so it
the bottom half would have been set in the ground and it would have stood like a
little headstone on the probably an earthwork that had been constructed now
that stone is intriguing because it shows that the Roman army is involved in
an engineering work of some kind construction work at Goldcliff on the
levels the stone was found in the estuary and clay beyond the present sea
war but we know that the sea had taken huge tracts of land even within recent
centuries at Goldcliff so it would have been on land probably when it when it
when it was set up and it's now just beyond the current sea wall which again
tells us something about land loss or gain in the estuary over time and the
fact that they're building thirty three and a half paces is intriguing because
the first cohort has double strength century so you could have anything from
the usual 80 men in the century up to 160 just building thirty three and a
half pay or constructing or digging thirty three and a half paces of
something that's not very long actually for 80 to 160 men to be working on just
thirty three and a half paces it then makes us think that because they've
divvied it up in thirty three and a half paces the likelihood is that it's one
third of something that's a hundred paces because they tend to think in
centuries and that sort of way of thinking so now you you're talking
anything up to sort of 300 odd men working on just a hundred paces of
somethings could be quite an important engineering work of some kind and we
have no sense of what this could be other than the fact that Goldcliff
pill merrily flows by it and the evidence from Martin Bell's work at
Goldcliff on the Iron Age site suggests that there was no Goldcliff pill there
in the Iron Age so the proximity of this stone to the Goldcliff pill the huge
quite significant water course that now flows out into the estuary at that point
might suggest that it's actually a Roman construction that they actually
constructed Goldcliff pill itself as a drainage ditch to drain a large part of
the levels to improve the grazing either for their cattle for their
livestock or that they were set to work down there because this was the legion
that helped to build Hadrian's Wall this was the legion although this was their
base they many of them many cohorts were sent up to the north they also built the
Antonine Wall with other legionary cohorts from other legions so when
they're not up there constructing engineering works like Hadrian's Wall or
the Antonine Wall a what you do with them to stop them causing trouble and
B how do you keep them trained and ready for that type of engineering work if
they've got nothing else to do and perhaps I just wonder whether they were
sent to the levels not through necessity necessarily but to train them and to
keep them occupied whilst they're back at base here at Cullion and they
can be usefully employed in work that can benefit the legion and the local
kivitas the local city state that's entered at Clowend and I suspect that's
what they're doing and so when we see those little field systems or
enclosures or drainage ditches at Nash when we see them at Goldcliff when we
see the the pill and the evidence from the Goldcliff stone these seem to be
the first attempts at not necessarily reclaiming the levels from the sea but
enhancing their grazing potential for more of the the the annual cycle for
more more of the more of the year so I think it's when it's the Roman period
when we start to see if you like intensification a serious attempt to
harness the levels for more of the year rather than the old system of moving
with the seasons in and out of the levels from the Fenedge down onto the
rich grazing of the Fagmites Reeds and the the the the very marshy area that it
would have been prior to the Roman enhancements.
Anecdotally, do you talk to people on the levels and they'll say oh the rene
system is all Roman? No the existing rene system is largely set in the alluvium
that is post-roman we know that that seals the Roman landscape underneath.
The two big questions are there are some major waterways the White Wall,
the Black Wall that come down and the Monk's Ditch and the question at the
moment is just how old are they? We know that the monasteries maintained them
certainly, hence the names, but it is very very possible that they have Roman
origins and we just don't know for certain yet because we don't have the
date in evidence to prove whether their origins lie in the Roman period but the
Romans certainly begin the process that either created them or led to led
sequentially to their creation. My suspicion is that the Romans were
involved in some way in the proto White Wall, Black Wall and Eve and others
probably in between in that we start to see environmental changes that can be
explained in the Roman period and later Roman period by land improvement if you
like. So we've seen that with the Goldcliffe stone so it's just the extent
of it and which particular parts of it but then that system is then it becomes
those particular renes, those primary arteries if you like within the
system. In the early medieval period just after the Roman period they start
to become really important boundaries between land holdings so it suggests
they have antiquity that they go back a long way in time. So the
suspicion is yes at the moment that the major renes might have had Roman
origins but not necessarily in exactly the same form that they are today but
those will have been either maintained or reconstructed in their sort of
more modern formats by later ages. Certainly the monastic holdings had an
important part to play in that hence Monk's Ditch because any lands that they
could reclaim from the sea they could keep so there was a huge benefit as a
land grab on if you like if you can if you can defend land from the sea it's
yours so it's the local lords of manners had an interest in doing what they
could to improve their lands as best they could and reclaim as many
permanently from the sea as they possibly could. By medieval times
obviously sea level has risen and then you start to need to defend then so you
get the wall being built and it's not understood. Maiga means wall, Magwa
means wall and it's not fully understood whether that relates to just some old
archaeological walls of a Roman villa somewhere or whether it actually refers
to white wall or whether it might actually refer to the sea wall itself
because it actually stops at Maiga and Deerogget and Caldecott weren't
defended they were not held by the monasteries and defense from the sea
certainly on the Caldecott moor and in Rogget actually came very very late in
the 19th century whereas Maiga and along to Goldcliff you can see it from the
12th century so you know there's a huge difference in different places and one
of the the wonderful places on the levels is Moorgate in Undy because it's
a medieval house it doesn't look like it from the road but it is inside it's
medieval or at least Tudor, late medieval on the inside and the name of it it
sums up its geographical location it was the Moorgate because that was the
start of the moor on the undefended levels once you get beyond Maiga so the
place names are memories in often of what was once there.
Reidwick, the Redwick, the dairy farm in the reeds reminds us it was mainly
pastoral, dairy farm is cattle is not arable down there and then we move along
and you've got where I grew up Caldecott which is a very interesting
Anglo-Saxon place name uncommon in Wales because the part of Wales where
Caldecott lies on the Gwent level was anglicized very very early on because it
yo-yoed before the Norman conquest between the Welsh and Harold Godwinson
held it for a little while and had his hunting lodge at Portscrew it very very
briefly or was constructing one before it was destroyed by the Welsh and
Caldecott is actually an Anglo-Saxon name and there were about 120 Caldecott's in
England and they center on the Kingdom of Mercia the pre-Norman Kingdom of
Mercia and it's thought that there is a link with that place name and a court or
Witan that was held at Exeter in the early 900s where the Anglo-Saxon earls
were very concerned that they were executing too many people for
committing theft and especially too many teenage boys and so they wanted to
commute the death sentence to or cutting off hands etc to banishment so they seem
to have set up places that were away from the rest of society away from Roman
roads they're commonly on wasteland that aren't isn't otherwise useful isn't
otherwise fertile for arable farming and they're at the edges of Shires
normally they seem to congregate at Shire edges and it's been argued I think
quite convincingly that these Caldecott's can be interpreted as as cold
shelters cold means cold and shelter cot cotter shelter that that we're in the
sense of cold shoulder rather than not just not heated because they these
places may actually been the places of banishment where people were allowed to
squat if they were pushed out of society and Caldecott's in a similar location
it's got its back to the the more the level it's away from the other main
centers Port Scuett and Covent at that time it's not near the Roman Road
Network not very close to it and so it's sufficiently distant and for most
periods you don't want to be actually on the coast because of piracy it's quite a
dangerous place to be so early ports such as Bristol Newport they're a little
way up river Kyleon they're not actually on the mouth of the river they're a
little way up river Cardiff little way up river more so than it needs to be
you sheltered from the sea and just out in the mouth but they they come up with
the river so that you're not too close and and too easy of access for people
that might be planning maritime smash and grab raids so again another place
name that suggests from the early period what the landscape might have been like
it's the place that other people don't want to necessarily be at some perhaps a
place that's still marginal a place that's still accessed only perhaps
seasonally and for the summer grazing and not for arable in the way that in
the way that that the fan edge would be
Have you done that?
Well I was just interested in the link between Latin and Welsh and the way that you described the fact that the Welsh language or Celtic language whatever it was has retreated in that area fairly early on.
I think it's quite significant because in Welsh particularly Welsh place names, eddow,
farm names and so on describe very closely geographical features and so so
forth yeah there doesn't seem to be that much evidence then in the levels of
oh no there is I've concentrated so far on the Caldecott level and I've
concentrated in the two case studies are on to the east Redwick and Caldecott
to the east in the Anglicised part of the Caldecott level to the east of the
Monks ditch now as you get to Nash and Goldcliff you see a completely
different field system that was pointed out by Stephen Rippon at Exeter and you
start to get Welsh place names at land holdings that look like the Welsh system
where inheritance was split equally between the areas etc and where the
the land at the fields are not grouped together necessarily as whole farms but
spread around a little bit more and a bit more higgledy-piggledy if you like
now in the east area so the Mathen level and Roggetmore and along to
Magor that were early Norman plantations if you like and it's thought that
Whitsun was probably a Norman land claim for example you you get English
descriptions of the landscape so you get summer lees the summer pastures the
summer meadows lees and the Lee and so the summer lease or even summertime in
Newport the summer grazing again so again pastoral again it's cattle on the
whole sheep as well but mainly cattle I should say I keep harking back to cattle
because when you look at the artwork from the Iron Age Roman boundary they're
fixated on cattle they love their escutcheons and mounts that are ox heads
and that sort of thing so I get a very strong sense that wealth may have been
considered in terms of your your cattle holding at the time you know we might
look at somebody's car or even the motor what version of a mobile phone they
might be brandishing I think at that time in this part of the world you might
have been judged on your cattle basically you're the size of your ranching
and we are talking ranching we're not looking at fields here with hedgerows
that comes later on it is a sort of herding proper ranching in the sort of
American sense so on the whole but then you need enclosures to bring them in so
there are sort of enclosures that are created what we would see as fields but
not the whole landscape there are fields that just planted groups of
fields planted here and there within the landscape rather than a whole
landscape fields once you get to the other side of monk stitching start to
change and your summer leases and your your your summer grazing start to become
Mardis which again one of the senses in Welsh of a Mardie is is the summer
grazing and names like tremor first so you've got these these settlements that
again are down on the fence but but they're they're they're named in Welsh
so this naming seems to have solidified around you know around the time of the
coming of the norm and some of the names stick from pre-norman times some of them
are new depending on the land holdings but they the main difference that gives
us this boundary about along the line of the monk stitch really it starts to
solidify around the time of the coming of the Normans so whatever you were
calling it by then seems to have largely stuck but it gives us again that that
not deliberate but this this this circumstantial fossilization of a
moment in time where you can see a boundary where the anglicized influence
has come and this is Anglo-Norman but again it's the the the Anglo-Norman
influence has got so far with land holdings and indeed the doomsday
holdings in this part of the world that that mention who holds what land as far
as Carleion were very very fortunate that the Caldecott level was included in
doomsday is the most westerly entry within it the rest of Wales wasn't
Norman so isn't in doomsday they speak of the hardwicks and we've got hardwick
at chapstone and elsewhere still in the place names hardwicks are dairy farms
again so it's very very very clear what's going on here
Caldecott's got plows by then because it's mentioned they're all taxed
because the Norman view of the feudal system was that all land in Britain has
one landowner it's the king and it's doomsday and this is his terrier of his
tenants so even the lords and the you know the the the sheriffs everybody
beneath him they're all tenants of the king so although we'd look up to them as
the top of the the top branches of the tree they're not they still they're
still tenants of the king and he's got this list now of what's owed to him by
his tenants for for that those lands their mills their fisheries etc their
plows how many people they're working on those farms on the hardwicks etc and
then whatever profit they can make over and above that is obviously theirs
but it's very clear from those early documents how the landscape certainly
in the east is starting to shape up as a more intensively managed landscape but
still along the lines of that time of what it probably was in the Roman
period and beyond they just had in more and more land improvement mechanisms
through drainage and then eventually through to sea defense to to the mix to
further defend the land problem is that the land behind is now fossilized behind
those medieval sea walls but the sea is still rising behind it and of course many
of our great cities were and urban conurbations were trading ports and ports
by definition at sea level but many of them have early foundation dates in the
Roman period like Cullian or in medieval times like Newport Cardiff and Roman
Cardiff and Roman Carmarthens etc but where development was at the medieval
or Roman high tide mark and high and dry it wouldn't necessarily be today
because of sea level rise so there are lessons I think to be learned for future
generations in terms of how we manage our responses to climate change and
environmental change and for the levels perhaps that informs us in terms of the
fact that the only response really in the past was to move in and out of those
areas so like a canoe we're going to find out that just standing there and
commanding the sea to behave is not going to work and it might be necessary
to work out a rationale and a methodology for allowing the sea to take
any land that it requires and to be able to move in and out of the landscape as
change continues because the one norm is change people tend to shy away from it
but the one fact archaeologically and environmentally is change so we need to
learn the lessons from the past to inform the future
Talking about the estuary, I've spoken to a few people who have been out there and follow the tide date
black rock fishery for example they're always finding clay pipes and musket balls etc
and could you tell us about your fishing basket find
the context around that and any other work you've done on it?
yeah I was a student in conservation at Cardiff University in the early 90s and
we had to go to a museum for eight weeks each summer to gain on the job
vocational experience as an internship and because of my great interest in the
geographical area around Newport and the levels I chose one placement at Newport
Museum and Art Gallery working under the great Kate Hunter there the head
conservator at the time and during my internship Nigel Nailing from the
University of Lampeter was working out on the mega level beyond the sea wall
surveying mainly surveying fish traps etc that had been first discovered and
highlighted in the studies that had been undertaken in advance of the
construction of the second seven crossings so they looked at environmental
impact before its construction and archaeological impact if it was going to
destroy archaeology along its path then they were able to record it before
destruction or remove it they looked either side as well because the
construction process could start to change the way the estuary maybe swirled
around and you know scoured or what have you and a fish trap was noted at
mega that had been half sectioned by the tide naturally by the tide which
enabled the insides to be seen where you've got a kind of non return valve a
cone shaped internal wicker structure that prevents the fish can swim down
into the trap but they find it hard to get past the funnel back out again and
because this had been half sectioned naturally by the tide it was a
beautiful example that could be used for teaching of how these things actually
work because when you recreate them you can't see the insides because it's a
round wicker basket so it was being destroyed by the tide which was scouring
it away so it made a perfect project for an undergraduate student because if we
were successful in lifting it Newport Museum would get a 12th or 13th century
original fishing trap from the estuary that would be an excellent display and
teaching resource but if we failed it was going to be destroyed by the sea
anyway so it wasn't really a major part of the project and there were no funds
available as usual story but we had some old casting bandage that's used for
broken arms or broken legs and the sell by date had long gone so again if it was
kind of I think it was a polyurethane that reacted on contact with moist air
ideal for the levels so if it hadn't gone off we're going to use up this
stuff it was a free fish trap if we could get it out so I was sent out there
with a mud sled and given some help and we excavated around the thing we found
the stake which was lifted with it that originally been used to tether it to
hold it in in the estuarine mud and it and its stake were excavated around to
leave them on a pedestal and that's all we could achieve in the first tide
because that part of the level it's very very shallow inclined from the
fan edge down from the sea wall down onto the gravels beyond the mud but the
mud is very thick it's about two feet thick and so the tide comes in quicker
there at mega then it's possible for a man to run on land not alone get across
that mud so if you get trapped by the tide that's it out there you can't get
back so we had a very small window of opportunity to excavate so we just dug
around it the first time I placed my trowel down by the side of the
excavated trap and bandaged the thing round to protect it and then went to get
my trowel and it just gone and I thought well that's easy I put it by there I'll
just fish around in the mud this slurry that's out there see if you can find it
couldn't feel it anywhere that never did find it so I had to abandon the
trowel and most archaeologists become attached to their trowel because you
that was the trowel that dug this or found that and found the funny feature at
Coend so I'd lost this trowel and then we returned the next day after the tide
had gone in gone out and it was low tide again and Lomiel sat on the surface
proud about 12 feet away probably washed up the estuary and back down again was my
trowel bright orange because the iron had turned to iron chloride big crystals
of iron chloride on this work hard and steel trowel and we then dug underneath
the fish trap slid it up onto a mud sled and it was taken in a minibus off to
Newport Museum where it slowly was allowed to dry out and then a future
Cardiff intern after my time with Kate excavated down to the fish trap and
dried it out and stabilized it for display and it's still displayed now in
the gallery with a photograph of it in situ the underside that you can't see in
the case with the half section fish trap with the sort of non return valve and
it's still displayed in the bandage that we used to actually lift it that actually
shows the lifting process and it's resting on the estuarine mud that filled
it when it was in the estuary all preserved this was a little bit of the
seven estuary that's been lifted for display in in Newport Museum and it's
quite a rare example of a of a fish trap of that date the trowel then I put away
and forgot about because it could really be used very well anymore and gone very
orange and when I last saw it a few years later it had just completely turned
to orange powder a solid steel forged trowel had just completely corroded away
and turned to orange powder because of the the aggressive nature of the chlorine
in the seawater that just destroys ironwork so it just shows how aggressive
the environment can be for some things metals especially if they don't become
concreted they just dissolve away basically out there or can do if not
buried in in the clay that sort of encapsulates them but other things such
as organics can become waterlogged in oxygen free environments within that
heavy clay and they can be preserved for thousands of years and the fish trap
probably six or seven hundred maybe eight hundred years old perfectly
preserved because there was no oxygen getting into that mud that could
actually start the decay process and support the bacteria that would then
destroy or the fungi that would then destroy the organic wicker basket so
organics out there the potential for organic preservation is absolutely huge
and that's shown by two of the vessels that have been recovered from out there
the mega pill wreck a medieval vessel the Barlands farm boat a Roman boat
that was recovered from the Gwent Euro Park near the motorway junction at mega
right up on the fan edge there but it probably been sailed up a creek and
abandoned there but because it was filled with the alluvium that heavy gray
clay no oxygen got in and the wood was perfectly preserved and of course the
Newport ship which was similarly filled with the same clay oxygen free
environment completely preserved the wood the Barlands farm boat was fully
excavated by Glamorgan Gwent Archaeological Trust no that that was
whilst I was working I think that was again about the early 90s I think they
excavated that so probably I was still at university at that time or working at
Cardiff University that was excavated by Glamorgan Gwent Archaeological
Trust it's been fully published it's got its own volume but it's it's now
preserved at Newport Museum it's not always on display it depends I think it
may have been moved for display with the Newport ship it has been displayed in
John Frost Square in the museum on the Metsanin gallery in the past or elements
of it have been but the beauty with both the Megapill boat the the the
medieval one and the Roman Barlands farm boat are that they look like boats as
does the Newport ship you can see the shape and structure the length and the
construction methods so Newport sits on one of the most important collections of
maritime archaeology in the country and I very much look forward to the day when
it has a maritime museum that can display all of these vessels together
because there I can't think of any anywhere better actually to go and see
the full history from Bronze Age vessels that were planks sewn together
using withy ties from the willows of the levels right the way through the Roman
medieval vessels up to very nearly Tudor times
yeah yeah there's the Goldcliff plank and there's one from Caldecott Castle
Lake as well so we have two vessels there's one plank of what was thought to
be a Viking ship that was found at Newport dock when Alexandra dock was
being built but that's been recently dated and I think that Toby Jones has
recently discovered the likely date for that now is again medieval later
medieval than early medieval so there is a wealth of maritime archaeology and of
course again how fitting for Newport that the name of the city encapsulates
its importance it's raison d'etre how appropriate that it has such an
important collection of maritime archaeology that's just waiting for
presentation and display I think is one of the things that Newport has as an
asset that could attract people from the rest of the country and abroad to this
part of the world to explore this landscape and the seven estuary as a
communication route and that other people just don't have so I very much
look forward to the time it will happen one day when when all these vessels are
are beautifully displayed and interpreted because for whatever reason
and nobody seems to be put to be able to put their hand on it there is just
something innately satisfying to most people about boats they just adore
looking at and learning about boats and there's been long long understood but
it's almost as in the way that green is a calming color there is just something
about vessels maybe it's the skeletal nature of this structure the graceful
lines but most you know many people find boats deeply satisfying and they're a
huge draw so the sooner they're on display together the better
I'm just gonna ask about your fish traps again yeah when you found that fish
trap yeah how did you feel well it'd been found it by it being with um first
located by the survey for the sabbath which was known about they knew where it
was and they could take me straight to it so I was literally taken straight to
it right there is lifted but when I gently cleaned off the surface and found
the stake that had held it in place that's the magic if you like the fact
that it was half sectioned was magical and you could see that it was all there
is in perfect condition that's magical from a survival point of view but when
you get the additional element of the story that human element of the act of
staking the thing to hold it in position that's the magic for me where
you are retrieving that extra part of the process that extra part of the
artifact just to remove the basket is not like the object it's the object and
its stake that the stake that held it in place there you've got the whole
functioning item if you like it tells more of the story to just lift the
basket would have been to compromise it and only lift a part of the the whole if
you like so yeah it was a discovery of the stake that the stake was there and
that was particularly satisfying to me because of the stories that lead on from
that the way that it worked the way it was held in position the way it was
accessed the way the fish were removed fish are hugely important part of the
diet conversely you go back to the iron age and it's questioned whether the iron
age people really really had fish at all it's very rare in fact I don't think any
fish bones have been found on iron age sites but a lot of iron age sites won't
lend themselves to the preservation of fish bone but it's possible that a fish
were not as certainly not as an important a part of iron age diet as as
it was in medieval times so again you can see different interactions with the
environment and big debates now on fisheries over fishing under fishing
sustainable fishing you name it we can look back at past times when when
reliance on different aspects of the environment were different and again
they it all helps to inform us about perhaps where balance may lie when we
take different approaches to our environment yes yes I grew up in the
area and they they both grew up in in the area too yes I call we used to call
it the Moors if you look at the most 17th century maps early maps they'll
just be a label across sort of from Nash across to mega the more Godwin the
bishop and corresponded with William Camden a lot when he was writing his
first history of Britain Britannia and Camden describes the moor as a fennie
tract that lies beneath the fennage and was considered to be really quite an
unhealthy place again these these prejudices continue quite late as later
1763 we've got a letter from the vicar of Nash the rector of Nash explaining to
his bishop that he never goes to Nash even though he's the rector of the
parish and he pays a curate to go there because he went there once and he got
the egg and it was nearly the death of him and if he was made to live there in
his parish it would be the death of him and his family so and the previous
bishop said that was okay so he trusts that the present bishop will follow
suit so and and he said that he lives in Ponte pool very nicely and that's no
intention of ever going anywhere near Nash so you can see that there's this
the moor is the way it was seen and again this Caldecott thing this cold
harbor this cold shelter there were lots of cold harbors and cold harbors were
probably these cold shelters cold cots cold cottages that weren't places of
banishment in in the case of cold harbors they're just seasonal bivouacs or
sort of the equivalent of the camper van or tent where you can be with your
flocks during the summer periods often they don't even have evidence of hearths
for actually cooking there but their shelters that are probably unheated or
largely unheated cold shelters just so that you can be near your flocks or
herds on the levels during the summer months so I think we know that the
place name evidence the archaeological evidence it's all leading towards a very
pastoral and largely the level still our posture and largely cattle based
exploitation well I lived not far from the edge of the moor at Caldecott so we
just used to travel over the entrance to the seven tunnel for log walks along the
seawall accessed near the anti-aircraft gun in placement near the near what was
then the Caldecott sewage works so there was always a footpath down to the level
there it passed a Roman farm site at Stoop Hill as it was once called Stoop
Hill and the the rising ground coming up off the Fern edge and I was always
fascinated by the flotsam and jetsam the the driftwood that used to be
distributed in hundreds of thousands of tons along that part of the level and
it seems to have been a long-standing habit of the river to deposit on that
particular tract of the more because and when I later went to look at the parish
registers at Caldecott Church and there are a number of entries of burials in
the churchyard of parts of a body of a person unknown that get washed up on the
Caldecott moor and it was fascinating again that's quite a unique entry in a
burial register you know other parishes aren't going to have parts of a body of
a person unknown regular not regularly I wouldn't say regularly but from time to
time entered in the the parish register because they had to be accorded a
proper burial somewhere within the the consecrated churchyard so it you know
this habit of the river depositing there was quite you know quite quite a
strong one it seems over a long period of time another odd entry in the burial
register was that there seems to have been certainly at least one occasion
where soon after the 7th tunnel actually opened for passengers sadly some
infants were newborns were taken through the tunnel by their mothers but
didn't come out the other side and were either thrown from trains in the
darkness of the tunnel or or what have you and they were buried at Caldecott as
well so you know it's it's all about the we've talked about the agricultural
human responses to the environment but as soon as you've got new technologies
like a tunnel a very long dark tunnel that newly opens people find ways of
utilizing it that the the the the people that planned it could never envisage
but they're all recorded there in the registers because these these events took
you know took place and of course the entrance to the tunnel was was my route
over it over the the bridge if you like over the entrance on to onto the levels
that link with the tunnel and that access to the other side was always very
strong in my childhood with the knowledge of said book and the pumping
station and the efforts that were the mammoth effort to actually sink the
tunnel because of a great spring that they broke into underneath so that that
was all a huge part of the geography and that landscape was a very strong a
strong backdrop to the way I understood my geography which was that travel was
largely east-west along the edge of the fen you'd either go to the urban
conurbations in Newport Cardiff or beyond in the westward direction or
eastwards on to chapstow Gloucester Bristol broadly eastward once the seven
bridge was in position at chapstow during my childhood so it's all east-west you
don't do that that much southern movement so it always intrigued me
standing on the seawall at Caldecott you could see the beautiful reflections from
the lights from the windows at Portishead at sunset and the gleaming
sort of display of the reflected light from the windows there but I'd never
been there and the other could see it and it was a stone so it's closer than
mega as the stone as the crow flies but I've never been there I didn't know it
at all I still don't know it well so I've spoken since in Thornbury regularly
and it was sort of 17 to 20 minutes away and yet unless you need to go there you
don't necessarily go there because it's not on that east-west corridor that
you're so familiar with and I'm sure I upset many people when I did a Radio 4
interview talking about landscape at Redwick recently and I said you know the
people here on the levels they probably don't have a good knowledge of what's
the other side of Grey Hill and I maintain that they won't have a detailed
knowledge of the parishes they might know they travel through it to us or
what have you but they won't know Clanclau very well I bet they won't talk
Lantricent or Lantricent they don't stop off there whereas on the east-west
corridor you probably do and those movements are very ancient the Roman
fortress was placed at Cullion because it controls the lowest crossing point of
the Asc Gloucester was placed there by the Romans probably because it was
already there but because it was the lowest crossing point of the seven and
so this movement in this east broadly east-west what we might call the M4
corridor is very ancient almost certainly pre-roman certainly Roman and
post-roman and that informs in my mind future debates with regard to the M4
relief road or lack thereof because it doesn't matter to me which side people
fall on there is perfect logic for not building it from environmental impact
and archaeological impact reasons etc but the one thing you cannot escape is
that east-west movement is a reality in this geography that is age-old and will
continue for future generations how we deal with that manager is for mines
greater than mine and seemingly greater than a lot of the people that have
applied their minds to it but it's it's something that is inevitable people will
need to move east-west it's absolutely a given so how that's dealt with is
something that will have to be grappled with and I think again the past can
inform us the historic movement has always been ever further south and it's
ironic that the the southern distributor road was south of the M4 and
any M4 relief road will fall south again so since Roman times what probably
started off life as the 848 and the ridgeway above it has come down ever
further south with the M4 the railway line and then and then but the
geographical reality of that is fixed so this is where the past can help no it
doesn't give us the answer as to what to do but it informs us that this is a
reality that we can't escape so we need an innovative and the best possible
solution to what is a given problem that's not going to go away I've done
very little over there actually because it it hasn't fallen within my area of
geographical sort of upbringing my background or my my world of work the
Wendlug level is of great interest because there is possible evidence
there for a more intensive Roman land improvement system possible ancient
Roman fields has been disputed as to where they are the Roman material sits
in these ditches but of course there are different ways material can find
their way to different levels so it's still a matter of dispute as to how
extensive the Roman drainage system and possible defense was on the Wendlug
level but there are some again important sites at Beysleg by Silica takes its
name from a Roman isled structure there's a villa there cross Carni
Indian there's another one Koikurnu so some very interesting and important
sites again on the Fen edge and then you come down onto the Fen with the later
medieval churches at St. Brides and Peterstone great medieval structures
that show how important it's certainly Peterstone was it rivals Cardiff as an
architectural edifice so a very important place in medieval times in
its own right but but later encroachments or movements down on to
the onto the Fen edge itself and of course they're important because they
hold some of the flood markers that record the the one flood of 1607 which
up to that point was the most completely documented and and within
certainly living memory or fable at the time the most devastating flood that
had been experienced by most people in the Seventh Estuary.
I've spoken to a few people who one chap in particular lives in Rocket or I used to
call it Rogier and to us corrected and he paints a really blissful childhood
before the M4 going down you know bird nesting fishing yeah and
Ealing following the Penhay Beagles yeah yeah yeah yeah you're much younger
than that and I think there's a difference I I was fortunate to have
known Derek Upton who was one of the great great people of the levels the
Seventh Estuary levels research committee is basically dedicated and
dedicated his website to his memory he was the first person because he used to
roam around out in the mud and beyond the mud deep out into the estuary and
places that other people wouldn't dare go but a lot of the archaeology was
being exposed and eroded out through scouring and he understood it
incredibly well and he drew the attention of our professional archaeology
to what was going on out there so there's the Upton trackway that he
discovered many of the footprints and thanks to him and thanks to people like
Martin Bell who you know took the baton and run with what was being discovered
out there by Derek and others and made their own discoveries we have a much
better understanding now that generation did and the lave net fishermen they they
they were much more heavily involved my my involvement with the level in
childhood was just as an observer of it not going out into it in that way but I
was around to hear the stories you know out at our end in the in the
Valley I was only told not so very long ago that they used to walk the
curhounds out from it and to places like Coent and the slough which means marsh
the slough the ancient manor house of Coent and they had kennels there to
overnight rest them so they could rest out a quite then they would hunt in the
Neddon Valley down onto the Caldecott levels from slough and all the fences
weren't barbed wire they were just thin wire so that it didn't damage the horses
or the hounds while they were hunting back and forth these details you
wouldn't capture any other way nobody records the archaeology of barbed wire
fences but these are realities that enabled the hunt and I was told that Lady
Kerr would anybody that lost chickens to a fox she would pay for the chickens she
would buy the dead chicken carcasses or pay you the equivalent so that you
weren't out of pocket so that there was no animosity to the foxes or the
presence of the foxes there was no financial loss to any of the people in
the area so there were plenty of foxes to hunt so it's not necessarily a good
news story but it's the way it's the way society functioned in that time and I
don't go back to that time but I've spoken to people that have a memory of
it or a very distant memory or were told in their childhood of the way it
functioned I was very very fortunate to be a neighbour for a time of Dennis
Collett who grew up at Carwent and then was a railwayman and had a very good
knowledge of the area and the levels and lived in Caldecock and the stories he
tells of they used to test the sort of flow of the water in the Great Spring in
the early years by treading blackberries and you get the big sort of tub of
blackberry juice which is a good dye and then you can pour it into the bore
holes and then they'd go down into the tunnel and wait for the purple black
berry juice to start coming through and then they could time the flow and work
out the flow through the Great Spring from further upstream at Carwent in the
Neddon Valley and down into the to the pumping station there the he remembers
stories of the whirly holes that once existed in the Neddon Valley. Neddon
means whirlpool and there were sink holes down into the cave system just
below Carwent just above Caldecock Castle and they once had whirlpools in
them that people could look down into these these whirling this underground
river that sort of came up to the surface at that point of course they
were all filled in as part of the tunnel works and then the water level
slightly dropped once they started pumping out the Great Spring and they're
now lost so these things if not recorded in this way through oral
histories or written down anywhere these memories are lost because sadly Dennis
is no longer with us and he didn't live long enough to be recorded in that way
so it'll be for me to pass on the story wherever I can the stories that he
passed on to me and also to ensure that his memory is maintained as somebody
lived in this area and people did used to shoot he used to shoot and he knew
you know knew how the old way was but with the intensive more intensive
urbanization if you like of southeastern Monmouthshire something that if we look
at the current proposals for the next local development plan is likely to
become a suburb of Bristol as far as we can tell with nearly all development
that's been put on the table in Monmouthshire south of the 848 basically
then the pressures will grow on in terms of environmental factors on wildlife on
on the environment and indeed on the road networks because you can only keep
adding more and more people so far before we approach gridlock and the one
thing I've queried about some of the road schemes is that they can very
successfully bypass Newport very very very easily and quickly with
with road construction but does that then in my mind get you to places like
Cardiff quicker so that you've just joined a different queue along possibly
a longer queue in a different place I just don't know at the moment everybody
queues in Newport and Cardiff but will you just join a queue that's twice as
long in Cardiff I just hope that our infrastructure and our planning is
sufficiently robust that we can solve the problems not just move from around
just check how long
so I think perhaps it's that that's nearly an hour and a half I think I
might end it there because if there's anything else you'd like to add no I
think I think we've sort of rambled around the levels quite well I'm just
gonna stop that there now